Add staking guides (#166)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: docs/docs-user/staking/staking.md

Note that this results in **higher staking rewards**, since the weight remains fixed, as opposed to a weight daily decreasing when the countdown is active. 

### Staking rewards distribution
A total of 24 million LSK tokens will be used over the course of 3 years for the LSK staking rewards program (8 million LSK per year).
This amount is provided to the [Rewards contract](https://blockscout.lisk.com/address/0xD35ca9577a9DADa7624a35EC10C2F55031f0Ab1f).

**Daily Reward Calculation:** Rewards are taken from the balance of the Rewards contract and calculated daily, based on the amount locked and the remaining locking duration.
Concretely, the weight for a locked amount is given by:

```
weight = lockedAmount * (remainingLockingDurationInDays + 150)
```

The total daily amount of staking rewards, 8,000,000 / 365 LSK, is then shared by all users proportional to their weight.

That means, the daily rewards for a locking position are calculated as: 

```
dailyRewards = weight/totalWeight * TotalDailyRewards
```

The current value of `totalWeight` can be checked in the [Rewards contract](https://blockscout.lisk.com/address/0xD35ca9577a9DADa7624a35EC10C2F55031f0Ab1f?tab=read_proxy).

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps add a paragraph title here e.g., "Example: Reward calculation for 1 vs 2 years" something like that.

For example, if someone stakes 100LSK for *1 year*, this would result in the following reward for that day, assuming `totalWeight` is `12462098705` for this example:

```
weight = 100 * (365 + 150) = 51500
```

```

> dailyRewards = 0.0905726657 LSK = 51500 / 12462098705 * 21917

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dailyRewards = 51500 / 12462098705 * 21917 = 0.0905726657 LSK 
```

> dailyRewards = 51500 / 12462098705 * 21917 = 0.0905726657 LSK 

Reviewer: Here we don't explain what the value 21917 is. Perhaps we can add the explanation above (e.g., line 77 saying that `totalDailyRewards` is the 8M/(3*365) = 21917.

```

If the 100 staked LSK expire in *two years*, this would result in the following reward on that day:

```
weight = 88000 = 100 LSK * (730 + 150)
```

```

> dailyRewards = 0.15476494334 LSK = 88000 / 12462098705 * 21917

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dailyRewards = 88000 / 12462098705 * 21917 = 0.15476494334 LSK 
```

---
title: Overview
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /user/staking/overview
description: 'How to stake LSK tokens to receive staking rewards.'
keywords:
  [
    'Lisk',
    'Lisk staking',
    'staking LSK',
    'staking rewards',
    'Lisk rewards',
    'earn LSK',
    'earn Lisk',
  ]
---

# Staking LSK tokens

> LSK staking is required for participating in the [Lisk DAO](https://www.tally.xyz/gov/lisk) and having therefore an active involvement in the project's decision making. Our staking system rewards LSK stakers for their participation with [staking rewards](#staking-rewards) based on their commitment duration . 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LSK staking is necessary to participate in the [Lisk DAO](https://www.tally.xyz/gov/lisk), ensuring active involvement in the project's decision-making. Our staking system rewards LSK stakers for participating with [staking rewards](#staking-rewards) based on their committed duration.
```

Author: ```suggestion
LSK staking is necessary to participate in the [Lisk DAO](https://www.tally.xyz/gov/lisk), enabling active involvement in the project's decision-making. Our staking system rewards LSK stakers for their participation with [staking rewards](#staking-rewards) based on their commitment duration.
```

## Staking Guides

> - [How to stake, claim and unstake](stake-unstake.mdx)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [How to stake, claim, and unstake](stake-unstake.mdx)
```

- [How to pause a locking position](pause-position.mdx)
- [How to increase the stake](../staking/increase-stake.mdx)
- [How to extend the duration of a stake](extend-duration.mdx)
- [How to unstake early](early-unlock.mdx)

## Locking positions

> Every time you [stake](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-stake-your-lsk-tokens) a certain amount of LSK for a specific locking duration, this will create a new **locking position**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every time you [stake](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-stake-your-lsk-tokens) a certain amount of LSK for a specific locking duration, a new **locking position** will be created.
```

:::tip
The **minimum locking duration** for staking is **two weeks**.

The **maximum locking duration** for staking is **two years**.
:::

Locking positions are represented as **NFTs** using the ERC-721 standard, similar to Uniswap v3 liquidity positions.
This enhances composability into DeFi and potential future uses.

## Staking rewards

> Staking rewards incentivize users to participate in governance, making the decision making more decentralized and community-driven.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Staking rewards incentivize users to participate in governance, making the decision-making more decentralized and community-driven.  
```

`totalDailyRewards` can be calculated by taking the yearly available rewards and dividing it by 365:  `8,000,000 / 365 = 21917`

### Example: Reward calculation for 1 vs 2 years
For example, if someone stakes 100LSK for *1 year*, this would result in the following reward for that day, assuming `totalWeight` is `12462098705` for this example:

```
weight = 100 * (365 + 150) = 51500
```

```
dailyRewards = 51500 / 12462098705 * 21917 = 0.0905726657 LSK 
```

If the 100 staked LSK expire in *two years*, this would result in the following reward on that day:

```
weight  = 100 * (730 + 150) = 88000
```

```
dailyRewards = 88000 / 12462098705 * 21917 = 0.15476494334 LSK 
```

After the end of this 3-year span, we expect that developments in the Optimism Superchain Ecosystem (shared, decentralized sequencers) will lead us to a new staking mechanism.

## Unstaking

Once the locking period of a [locking position](#locking-positions) has expired, it is possible to unlock the staked tokens again, by [unstaking](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-unstake-your-lsk-tokens) them.

:::tip

> In case you need to unlock your tokens earlier that the defined locking period, it is possible to unstake your tokens before the locking period expired by using the [early unlock](#early-unlock) option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case you need to unlock your tokens earlier than the defined locking period, it is possible to unstake your tokens before the locking period expires by using the [early unlock](#early-unlock) option.
```

Using fast unlock will involve a penalty to be paid.
:::

Once they are unstaked, the LSK tokens can be used as before for any other purpose.

### Early Unlock
Early unlock allows you to unstake your LSK tokens before their locking period has expired.
It involves paying a penalty and waiting for a 3-day emergency unlocking period.
The penalty is proportional to the remaining days in the staking period that will be skipped.

The penalty is calculated using the formula:

```
Penalty = 0.5 * Staked Amount * (Remaining Days / 730)
```

Please note that the maximum value for the remaining days is 730.

> For example, if a user wants to fast unlock a position with 100 LSK and remaining locking duration of 150 days, then the penalty is calculated as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if a user wants to fast unlock a position with 100 LSK and a remaining locking duration of 150 days, then the penalty is calculated as follows:
```

---
title: Overview
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /user/staking
description: 'How to stake LSK tokens to receive staking rewards.'
keywords:
  [
    'Lisk',
    'Lisk staking',
    'staking LSK',
    'staking rewards',
    'Lisk rewards',
    'earn LSK',
    'earn Lisk',
  ]
---

# Staking LSK tokens

> Lisk staking is rewarding LSK token holders based on their commitment duration with [staking rewards](#staking-rewards) and [voting power](docs-user/governance/overview.mdx#voting-power) in the [Lisk DAO](https://www.tally.xyz/gov/lisk).

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
LSK staking is required for participating in the [Lisk DAO](https://www.tally.xyz/gov/lisk) and having therefore an active involvement in the project's decision making. Our staking system rewards LSK stakers for their participation with [staking rewards](#staking-rewards) based on their commitment duration . 
```

Reviewer: Perhaps you can rephrase better than me, just showing the main idea here.

## Staking Guides

- [How to stake, claim and un-stake](stake-unstake.mdx)

<!-- - [How to increase the stake](increase-stake.md)
- [How to pause the locking period](pause-locking-period.md) -->

## Locking positions

> Every time you [stake](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-stake-your-lsk-tokens) a certain amount of LSK for a specific timeframe, this will create a new **locking position**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time you [stake](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-stake-your-lsk-tokens) a certain amount of LSK for a specific locking duration, this will create a new **locking position**.
```

Reviewer: I would not use timeframe instead of locking duration, to avoid confusion.

The further the end of the locking duration is in the future, the more rewards you get.
This also implies that the rewards decrease every day.
This way, we reward token holders for committing long-term to the Lisk project so we attract them as long-term advocates for Lisk while reducing short-term speculation and volatility. 

- Users can [claim](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-claim-staking-rewards) their rewards at any time.   
- Users can modify their locking positions (increase amount, extend locking duration) at any time they want.
- Users have the option to **pause** their locking period countdown.
That means, the remaining locking duration remains fixed until the user decides to resume it.
Note that this results in **higher staking rewards**, since the weight remains fixed, as opposed to a weight daily decreasing when the countdown is active. 

### Staking rewards distribution
A total of 24 million LSK tokens will be used over the course of 3 years for the LSK staking rewards program (8 million LSK per year).
This amount is provided to the [Rewards contract](https://blockscout.lisk.com/address/0xD35ca9577a9DADa7624a35EC10C2F55031f0Ab1f).

> Rewards are taken from the balance of the Rewards contract and calculated daily, based on the amount locked and the remaining locking duration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Daily Reward Calculation:** Rewards are taken from the balance of the Rewards contract and calculated daily, based on the amount locked and the remaining locking duration.
```

Reviewer: Somehow to show that here the user will read how to compute their daily rewards

Concretely, the weight for a locked amount is given by:

```

> lockedAmount * (remainingLockingDurationInDays + 150)

Reviewer: Perhaps
```suggestion
weight = lockedAmount * (remainingLockingDurationInDays + 150)
```

```

The total daily amount of staking rewards, 8,000,000 / 365 LSK, is then shared by all users proportional to their weight.

> 

Reviewer: I would then add here a little bit more of explanation to show how daily rewards for a user are calculated. 

Something like this:

"That means, the dailyRewards for a locking position are calculated as: weight/totalWeight * TotalDailyRewards"

Not sure but I would even add an example here, based on current contract situation, to show to users actual numbers.

E.g., assume someone stakes 100LSK for 1 year and make an assumption on totalWeight (just take the current contract value). Then we can show the actual number of dailyRewards.

And even then compare to the case that the locking duration is 2 years, to show the difference.

After the end of this 3-year span, we expect that developments in the Optimism Superchain Ecosystem (shared, decentralized sequencers) will lead us to a new staking mechanism.

## Unstaking

Once the locking period of a [locking position](#locking-positions) has expired, it is possible to unlock the staked tokens again, by [unstaking](stake-unstake.mdx#how-to-unstake-your-lsk-tokens) them.

:::tip
In case you need to unlock your tokens earlier that the defined locking period, it is possible to unstake your tokens before the locking period expired by using the [fast unlock](#fast-unlock) option.

Using fast unlock will involve a penalty to be paid.
:::

Once they are unstaked, the LSK tokens can be used as before for any other purpose.

### Fast Unlock
Fast unlock allows you to unstake your LSK tokens before their locking period has expired.
It involves paying a penalty and waiting for a 3-day emergency unlocking period.

> The penalty is proportional to the remaining days in the staking period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The penalty is proportional to the remaining days in the staking period that will be skipped.
```

The penalty is calculated using the formula:

```

> Penalty = 0.5 * Staked Amount * (Remaining Days / 730)

Reviewer: Perhaps explain that 730 is the maximum locking duration?

```

> For example, unlocking 100 LSK after 147 days would incur a penalty of 10.068 LSK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a user wants to fast unlock a position with 100 LSK and remaining locking duration of 150 days, then the penalty is calculated as follows:  [Add calculation]

Note that we multiply by 147 and not 150, since the user will still have to wait for 3 days, so the locking duration decreased by 147 overall. 
```
